[music]
>> Howdy, folks.
So, good afternoon or good whatever time
it is when you're watching this on
YouTube. I'm really excited to be here.
And um today I want to talk to you about
really uh what it takes to keep the
human in the loop where engineering is
concerned. I really want to start with a
human side before we talk about the
architecture here.
I think that the engineer of the future
is going to be really defined by the
person who is able to choose what is
worth doing.
They're going to own the evidence.
They're going to own the understanding
as well as the verdict.
around increasingly automated work
that's being done by agents. Now, when I
use the term verdict, I don't mean that
we're suddenly all going to be Judge
Judy. We're not.
But what I mean really is something just
a little bit different. I mean, we're
going to be accountable for the
production decisions.
Does something ship? Do we block it? Do
we redirect it or accept the risk?
Quality is something that we all talk
about a lot, but quality produces
evidence. A verdict assigns
responsibility.
And answerability is really what lets us
stand behind a verdict. And this of
course is not the only way that our
industry is starting to think about our
roles evolving.
Boris Cherney recently put some useful
language around what many teams are
starting to feel. The old craft
boundaries are getting blurry, and roles
are re-bumbling around the work itself.
And the important question here becomes
a lot less about what is your title and
more what part of the system can you
own?
Now,
I like this taxonomy quite a lot.
Um it's optimistic without being overly
vague. So, things like prototype, build,
sweep, grow, and maintain. And these are
real engineering modes.
Agents are going to help with all of
them, but the scarce thing is not merely
doing the task. It's going to be knowing
which mode your product needs and what
quality bar applies and who owns the
result at the end of the day.
Now, we've been talking about harnesses
and loop engineering and software
factories over the last couple of days.
We can talk why this shift is happening.
We moved past the model as the whole
story, right? With harness engineering,
the coding agent is the model plus the
harness around it, right? Your context,
your tools, your file system, Git. And
the harness is what turns intelligence
into something that you can delegate to.
The next move was loop engineering,
where we weren't just prompting one run
anymore. We were designing systems that
kept prompting, checking, and
remembering, and deciding what happened
next. And that's really when agents
[clears throat] started to feel like
infrastructure. And once you start
putting all of those things together,
you get that software factory. Dex
covered this well in his talk, where you
have agents that are running inside that
inner loop and evidence that comes out.
Humans still end up making the
production decisions in this loop. And
the wind really isn't moving us from it.
The wind is moving human judgments the
highest leverage checkpoint, I think.
And this is why it starts to matter now.
AI-generated and AI-assisted code is
becoming normal code for a lot of us.
One of Sonar's 2026 survey said that
AI-assisted code is no longer marginal.
It's increasingly having a large role in
our code bases. And once that happens,
answerability stops being this
philosophical world. It becomes an
engineering requirement. And there's a
quality point here as well, right? Like
we used to care about clean code, code
that people could read. But cleaner code
is actually not just going to help the
next human and the next person on your
teams. It actually helps the next agent.
Another one of Sonar's research uh
studies found that clean and messy repos
had roughly the same pass rates, but
clean code actually used fewer tokens
and caused fewer revisits. So there's a
lot of benefit to maintainability that
can fuel efficiency for your factories.
Now, making generation cheaper does not
automatically make review cheaper,
right? I think a lot of us are facing
this moment and we know that engineers
are not naive. The Sonar numbers say
that almost everybody is skeptical of AI
code. Now, I love working in my software
factory. I love building my engineering
loops. But the problem is still
capacity. If 96% of people don't fully
trust that code, but only about half
always verify before committing, we have
this danger that we've got distrust
without bandwidth. And so safety comes
from making verification cheaper,
clearer, and harder for people to skip.
And if you zoom out from the individual
reviewer to the organization, review and
validation start becoming a bottleneck
when governance isn't able to catch up
and adoption is already moving way
faster than any company can go and set
their policies. And this means that we
have some hard questions we have to deal
with, like did a model actually touch
this file?
And the hard questions are also like
what constraints guided that work? What
evidence was produced? What risk was
accepted and who owned the result?
Now, the agent can ship more than any of
us can review, right? So what are we
still good for?
I think it's a question that's on a lot
of our minds, right?
And you know, if Homer Simpson's
experience automating computers can
teach us anything, maybe this is our
future. I don't think it is. But it's
one direction things could take.
Now, let's try that again.
If change is where humans enter the
loop, if generation scales faster than
comprehension, the scarce resource
becomes judgment that's backed by
evidence. So, the question is no longer
how much can the agent do, but where
does human judgment still create
leverage?
Now,
I want to talk to you about two terms
that I'm going to use for the career
part of this talk, alpha and decay.
Alpha is the gap between what you can do
today and what current models can do.
That gap is a very real thing, and decay
is the clock on that gap. If the thing
that makes you special is a capability,
the frontier is eventually going to come
for it. Right? And there's a whole
conversation around this. This is one of
the reasons why taste keeps coming up.
Paul Graham had a point here that I
think is very right. When anyone can
make anything, choosing what to make
becomes very important, and I buy that.
But I also think that we have to be very
careful because taste can become a magic
word for whatever part of the work we
don't want to explain just yet.
Mitchell Hashimoto gave us a more useful
version of this definition. Taste is the
ability to make high-quality qualitative
judgments where no objective metric
exists yet. That matters because it puts
taste before the benchmark and before
the market has fully voted. When you try
out a model and you see the kind of UX
and the kind of experiences that it
builds, you can often tell when you
think it has taste or lacks taste or
where there's a gap there that humans
can fill.
Now, this is also only useful if we can
turn some of this concept around taste
into critique, examples, and better
judgment over time. So, yes, taste
matters when production gets cheaper.
And if anyone can generate 10 options,
the scarce skill is really knowing which
option deserves to exist.
But taste is not some eternal moat.
It's alpha as well.
Now, the people with taste are still
going to matter. I personally think
they're still going to matter for a long
time. But the best version of that skill
is not mystique.
It's making better calls and leaving
behind examples that your team and the
system can learn from.
Now, let's apply the decay test. Well,
we used to have speed. That decayed. We
used to have recall. You know, harnesses
have memory. Verification is moving into
harnesses, evals, static checks, and
model critique.
Taste, I continue to think this is going
to decay much more slowly, but it still
resets as models learn from examples and
preferences. Even judgment in some ways
is a slope rather than a wall. So, the
strategy is not to cling to any one
capability. It's for us to keep moving
our edges up a level.
So, this is one of the reasons why what
can the agent do is not the best
strategic question anymore. The list of
things that agents can't do just keeps
shrinking. The better question for us is
really what can only a human be
answerable for. Not because, you know,
any of us are are magical in any way,
but because some decisions actually
require ownership. They require context,
risk acceptance, and responsibility
after that work ships.
This is why the word engineer has to get
just a little bit stricter. More people
than ever can now make computers do
things, and I think that's truly
awesome. The total addressable market
for builders has never been larger, and
that's so cool.
But it's a huge expansion of leverage.
An engineer is not merely somebody who
can code, you know, and and get things
to exist. An engineer can reason about
systems. They think about constraints,
you defend trade-offs, you can manage
risk, and you're the person that can be
reached out to when things start to
break.
So, what are things that engineers
should avoid if we want to stay
effective and accountable in this
moment?
Well, the first thing to avoid really is
cognitive debt.
Now, cognitive debt is the erosion of
your understanding and memory around how
to solve problems. I think a lot of us
start to feel this the more that we're
using agents every single day. I know
that I feel this a lot. And it's because
we're deferring more and more to AI to
solve our problems. For code, it's the
gap between how much code exists in your
repo and how much any human on your team
genuinely understands. And this is why
things like delegation debt end up
mattering. You can have a build that
passes, you know, your tests, a PR that
you can merge, but your team can still
end up losing its ability to actually
explain the system that they are
shipping to production.
Now, a very real pressure is all much is
also how much we delegate. So, agents
can now stay inside the system long
enough for the human to lose the thread.
So, a 30-second run, right, can feel
like an interaction, but an hour or a
day-scale task, so something long
horizon, that's a work stream. And when
tasks can end up, you know, lasting that
long, especially when you begin running
many of them in parallel, review can't
just be a glance at the end. It has to
become a whole control system.
The second thing to avoid is cognitive
surrender. Now, this is when you blindly
accept AI's um responses. Like,
delegation is important cuz delegation
says, "Do the work, then show me enough
evidence that I can judge it." I still
make a judgment in that situation.
Surrender is really saying, "Hey, your
answer is now my answer before I have
formed any opinions myself.
Now,
um Wharton did a study that kind of
offers us a warning light here. When AI
was wrong, 73%
of people still thought that they they
you know they picked the wrong answer
and they felt more sure. So, the failure
mode is not using AI, but it's borrowed
confidence.
The third thing to avoid is
orchestration tax.
Now, if you've been in the Bay Area, you
will see people who for better or worse
are still walking around with their
laptops open or talking to you about
cloud agents. And
we're increasingly trying to run more
and more and more in parallel or telling
each other that we're shipping with
hundreds of agents or thousands of
agents. More AI agents running does not
mean that there is more of you
available. Your cognitive bandwidth does
not parallelize.
So, every loop that you create ends up
causing more decisions to route, merge,
verify, and integrate. And the fix is
not necessarily fewer agents, but it's
about designing your attention like a
system. Like where you enter, what you
require, what you reuse. You just want
to be very intentional about it.
Now, accountability can be a scary word
for a lot of people. And I wouldn't be
surprised if it made you want to go hide
in the bushes and just tell your agent
to deal with it.
But, accountability is not what remains
after agents get good. It's what lets
the rest of the whole system scale.
If agents can do more work, if they can
do it faster and parallel, better than
what many of us could do, the scarce
thing becomes the ability to explain
intent, to inspect evidence, to accept
risk, and improve the system when the
decision was wrong.
Now, here is the career math. The
half-life of an edge might be one model
release. Speed, recall, verification,
even taste all move as the frontier
moves. But, the half-life of a
signature, your credibility, your
expertise is much longer. And by
signature, I really mean the name on the
work, the person, the team, the
institution, whoever stands behind
what's actually shipped. So, skills can
earn leverage, accountability can turn
leverage into trust.
And this is one of the lines that I want
to draw pretty clearly. Agents can
choose, they can route, they can merge,
they can escalate, they can operate
inside policy. And in many systems, you
know, they can, they should. But
execution and responsibility are very
different things. The agent can follow
your runbook, but it can't inherit the
consequences. When something fails, the
question is, who understood the policy?
Who accepted the risk and who owns the
blast radius?
High agency is something that a lot of
us talk about these days as being like
this thing that we're looking for when
we're hiring. High agency is actively
taking ownership of your outcomes. So,
knowing when to delegate, when to
inspect, when to stop, and when to put
your name on the result. High agency in
this world is not I personally do
everything.
You know, that version doesn't really
scale. It's not just hustle theater, but
it's ownership with judgment attached.
This agency ladder tries to make that a
little bit more concrete. At the bottom,
you've got someone that flags a problem
and leaves it for the system. Higher up,
they execute, diagnose, propose,
recommend, and resolve. And the rare top
movement is discernment. You know, maybe
you find a problem and you decide
whether or not it's worth investing in.
Maybe it's not, and maybe you move on.
But when agents make more paths
possible, agency is not chasing every
single path. It's really just deciding
which paths deserve your ownership and
attention.
So, translate that into an operating
model. Agents can run much more of the
inner execution loop. They can
investigate, implement, test, and
report. I think that there's leverage in
that, but that outer loop is still
engineering. So, deciding, verifying,
approving, owning, that inner loop is
capability. The outer loop is agency.
And this is a boundary that I really
care about. Your agent returns evidence.
It returns diffs, tests, logs,
rationale, traces, trajectories,
screenshots, whatever the work itself
requires. But then the engineering
really begins. We decide whether the
work was worth doing. We verify whether
the evidence is enough, and we approve
or redirect or own what reaches
production. It doesn't matter if you're
someone that's just working with a small
number of agents, or whether you're
working with thousands of agents. I
still very much think that these ideas
apply. So, the boundary is not human
looks at AI output. The boundary is
evidence and responsibility.
So, here's an operational rule. Explain
it or don't ship it. And it's not
because humans have to type every line
or read every line, but because someone
has to understand the work well enough
to defend it. If you've ever worked in a
large code base or an enterprise code
base, some code bases have this concept
of an owners file or certain
subdirectories where there are people
who are on the hook for that part of the
system. You can think about this in a
very similar way. Who is accountable for
that part of your architecture and your
code base?
Your model might write the code, and the
question is really still whether you can
explain those changes that the agent is
shipping, whether you've got the
evidence where you understand the risks.
Now, this is one of the things I want
you to remember near the end. Automation
moves the floor for all of us.
Engineering continues to move up a
level, and our new work might be loop
design, evidence design, and brownfield
stewardship, but fewer keystrokes
doesn't mean less engineering over the
next few years. It means that there is
more surface area that needs taste,
verification, ownership, and ultimately
care.
I don't think I've ever been more
excited about the future of this field.
Every time that we have made it easier
to write software, we've predicted that
the world would need less of it. And in
fact, the opposite happened.
Higher-level languages happened,
frameworks, cloud, low code. The pattern
always went the other way.
And when you lower the cost, latent
demand ends up appearing. Those ideas
that people didn't think were feasible
to build and get out there are suddenly
unlocked. And agents are going to do the
same thing for a lot of people. It's not
going to remove engineering work. It's
going to move the bottleneck from can we
build this to should this exist and can
we answer for it? So, build the
factories, keep the lights on, own the
verdict. I hope this was useful. Thank
you.
>> [music]